Add a new Guide on using OTel to LGTM stack (#3828)
grafana/agent: docs/sources/flow/getting-started/opentelemetry-to-lgtm-stack.md

---
title: OpenTelemetry to LGTM stack
weight: 350
---

# OpenTelemetry to LGTM stack

> In the [previous guide][], we learnt how to ingest [OpenTelemetry][] data, and export it to a different destination. In this one, we will continue from there but send it to a Loki, Mimir and Tempo stack.

Reviewer: nit: Do we want to say Mimir here or Prometheus? The guide below talks a lot about Prometheus instead and in grafana cloud it is labeled as prometheus for me. Alternatively, we may want to more explicitly talk about Mimir in the Prometheus section for newcomers if we do want to keep it this way up here.

Author: Why not Prometheus? :)

Author: Added Mimir

> In the [previous guide][], we learned how to ingest [OpenTelemetry][] data and export it to a different destination. This guide shows you how to send the ingested OpenTelemetry data to a Loki, Mimir, and Tempo stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Grafana Agent Flow can be configured to collect [OpenTelemetry][]-compatible data and forward it to the Grafana stack

This topic describes how to:

* Configure Agent to send your data to Loki
* Configure agent to send your data to Tempo
* Configure Agent to store your data in Mimir
```

Suggesting some restructuring now that the document is more complete. This brings the intro in-line with the previous Getting started topics. We can shift the `previous guide` reference to the **Before you begin** section.

> [previous guide]: {{< relref "./collect-opentelemetry-data.md" >}}
> [OpenTelemetry]: https://opentelemetry.io

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[OpenTelemetry]: https://opentelemetry.io
```

Move the `previous guide` reference to the prerequisites

* [prometheus.remote_write][]

[loki.write]: {{< relref "../reference/components/loki.write.md" >}}
[otelcol.auth.basic]: {{< relref "../reference/components/otelcol.auth.basic.md" >}}
[otelcol.exporter.loki]: {{< relref "../reference/components/otelcol.exporter.loki.md" >}}
[otelcol.exporter.otlp]: {{< relref "../reference/components/otelcol.exporter.otlp.md" >}}
[otelcol.exporter.prometheus]: {{< relref "../reference/components/otelcol.exporter.prometheus.md" >}}
[otelcol.processor.batch]: {{< relref "../reference/components/otelcol.processor.batch.md" >}}
[otelcol.receiver.otlp]: {{< relref "../reference/components/otelcol.receiver.otlp.md" >}}
[prometheus.remote_write]: {{< relref "../reference/components/prometheus.remote_write.md" >}}

## Before you begin

* Ensure that you have basic familiarity with instrumenting applications with
  OpenTelemetry.
* Have a set of OpenTelemetry applications ready to push telemetry data to
  Grafana Agent Flow.
* Identify where Grafana Agent Flow will write received telemetry data.
* Be familiar with the concept of [Components][] in Grafana Agent Flow.

[Components]: {{< relref "../concepts/components.md" >}}

## The Pipeline

> We start with the config from the previous guide:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can start with the Grafana Agent Flow configuration you created in the previous getting started guide:
```

```river
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
  }

  http {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4318"
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.processor.batch.example.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.processor.batch.example.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.processor.batch.example.input]
  }
}

otelcol.processor.batch "example" {
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = "my-otlp-grpc-server:4317"
  }
}
```

This represents the pipeline:
```
Metrics, Logs, Traces: OTLP Receiver → batch processor → OTLP Exporter

> ```

Reviewer 2: Do we really need this? If I understand this right, this is the pipeline before you reconfigure to send to Loki, Mimir, and Tempo?

> We will be implementing the following pipeline in this guide:
> 
> ```
> Metrics: OTel → batch processor → prometheus remote write
> Logs: OTel → batch processor → Loki exporter
> Traces: OTel → batch processor → OTel exporter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will implement the following pipelines to send your data to Loki, Tempo, and Mimir:

```
Metrics: OTel → batch processor → prometheus remote write
Logs: OTel → batch processor → Loki exporter
Traces: OTel → batch processor → OTel exporter
```

```

## Grafana Tempo

> [Grafana Tempo][] is an open-source, easy-to-use, scalable distributed tracing backend. Tempo can ingest OTLP directly, and we can use the OTLP exporter to send the traces to Tempo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Grafana Tempo][] is an open-source, easy-to-use, scalable distributed tracing backend. Tempo can ingest OTLP directly, and you can use the OTLP exporter to send the traces to Tempo.
```

Address the reader directly.

```river
otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = "tempo-server:4317"
  }
}
```

> To use Tempo with basic-auth, which is the case with GrafanaCloud Tempo, you must use the [otelcol.auth.basic][] component. For example, you can get the Tempo config from the “details” page of Tempo in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use Tempo with basic-auth, which is the case with GrafanaCloud Tempo, you must use the [otelcol.auth.basic][] component. You can get the Tempo config from the Tempo **Details** page in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:
```

Do I read this right that you MUST use basic-auth for GrafanaCloud Tempo? OR do you have other auth options as well?

![](../../../assets/getting-started/tempo-config.png)

```river
otelcol.exporter.otlp "grafana_cloud_tempo" {
	client {
		endpoint = "tempo-us-central1.grafana.net:443"
		auth     = otelcol.auth.basic.grafana_cloud_tempo.handler
	}
}

otelcol.auth.basic "grafana_cloud_tempo" {
	username = 4094
	password = env("GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_KEY")
}
```

[Grafana Tempo]: https://grafana.com/oss/tempo/
[GrafanaCloud Portal]: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/account-management/cloud-portal/#your-grafana-cloud-stack 

## Prometheus

To send from OTLP to Prometheus, we do a passthrough from the [otelcol.exporter.prometheus][] to the [prometheus.remote_write][] component. The Agent’s Prometheus remote write is a more battle-tested implementation with a Write Ahead Log for resiliency.

```river
otelcol.exporter.prometheus "default" {
	forward_to = [prometheus.remote_write.default.receiver]
}

prometheus.remote_write "default" {
	endpoint {
		url = "http://prometheus:9090/api/v1/write"
	}
}
```

> To use Prometheus with basic-auth, which is the case with GrafanaCloud Prometheus, you have to configure the [prometheus.remote_write][] component. For example, you can get the Prometheus config from the “details” page of Prometheus in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use Prometheus with basic-auth, which is the case with GrafanaCloud Prometheus, you have to configure the [prometheus.remote_write][] component. You can get the Prometheus config from the Prometheus **Details** page in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:
```

Address the user more directly

![](../../../assets/getting-started/prometheus-config.png)

```river
otelcol.exporter.prometheus "grafana_cloud_prometheus" {
        forward_to = [prometheus.remote_write.grafana_cloud_prometheus.receiver]
    }

prometheus.remote_write "grafana_cloud_prometheus" {
    endpoint {
        url = "https://prometheus-us-central1.grafana.net/api/prom/push"

        basic_auth {
            username = 12690
            password = env("GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_KEY")
        }
    }
}
```

## Grafana Loki

[Grafana Loki][] is a horizontally scalable, highly available, multi-tenant log aggregation system inspired by Prometheus. Similar to Prometheus, to send from OTLP to Loki, we will do a passthrough from the [otelcol.exporter.loki] component to [loki.write] component.

```river
otelcol.exporter.loki "default" {
	forward_to = [loki.write.default.receiver]
}

loki.write "default" {
	endpoint {
		url = "http://loki-endpoint:8080/loki/api/v1/push"
}
```

> To use Loki with basic-auth, which is the case with GrafanaCloud Loki, you must configure the [loki.write][] component. For example, you can get the Loki config from the “details” page of Loki in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use Loki with basic-auth, which is the case with GrafanaCloud Loki, you must configure the [loki.write][] component. You can get the Loki config from the Loki **Details** page in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:
```

---
title: OpenTelemetry to Grafana stack
weight: 350
---

# OpenTelemetry to Grafana stack

> Grafana Agent Flow can be configured to collect [OpenTelemetry][]-compatible data and forward it to the Grafana stack

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can configure Grafana Agent Flow to collect [OpenTelemetry][]-compatible data and forward it to the Grafana stack
```

This topic describes how to:

* Configure Agent to send your data to Loki

> * Configure agent to send your data to Tempo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Configure Agent to send your data to Tempo
```

> * Configure Agent to send your data to Mimir / Prometheus Remote Write

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Configure Agent to send your data to Mimir or Prometheus Remote Write
```

  Grafana Agent Flow.
* Identify where Grafana Agent Flow will write received telemetry data.
* Be familiar with the concept of [Components][] in Grafana Agent Flow.
* Complete the [Collect open telemetry data][] getting started guide. You will pick up from where that guide ended.

[Collect open telemetry data]: {{< relref "./collect-opentelemetry-data.md" >}}

[Components]: {{< relref "../concepts/components.md" >}}

## The Pipeline

You can start with the Grafana Agent Flow configuration you created in the previous getting started guide:

```river
otelcol.receiver.otlp "example" {
  grpc {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4317"
  }

  http {
    endpoint = "127.0.0.1:4318"
  }

  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.processor.batch.example.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.processor.batch.example.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.processor.batch.example.input]
  }
}

otelcol.processor.batch "example" {
  output {
    metrics = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    logs    = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
    traces  = [otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input]
  }
}

otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = "my-otlp-grpc-server:4317"
  }
}
```

> This represents the pipeline:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The pipeline currently looks like this:
```

```
Metrics, Logs, Traces: OTLP Receiver → batch processor → OTLP Exporter
```

> You will implement the following pipelines to send your data to Loki, Tempo, and Mimir:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will implement the following pipelines to send your data to Loki, Tempo, and Mimir or Prometheus:
```

```

> Metrics: OTel → batch processor → Prometheus remote write (Mimir)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metrics: OTel → batch processor → Mimir or Prometheus remote write
```

		basic_auth {
			username = 5252
			password = env("GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_KEY")
		}
	}
}
```

[Grafana Loki]: https://grafana.com/oss/loki/

## Grafana Tempo

[Grafana Tempo][] is an open-source, easy-to-use, scalable distributed tracing backend. Tempo can ingest OTLP directly, and you can use the OTLP exporter to send the traces to Tempo.

```river
otelcol.exporter.otlp "default" {
  client {
    endpoint = "tempo-server:4317"
  }
}
```

To use Tempo with basic-auth, which is required with GrafanaCloud Tempo, you must use the [otelcol.auth.basic][] component. You can get the Tempo config from the Tempo **Details** page in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:

![](../../../assets/getting-started/tempo-config.png)

```river
otelcol.exporter.otlp "grafana_cloud_tempo" {
	client {
		endpoint = "tempo-us-central1.grafana.net:443"
		auth     = otelcol.auth.basic.grafana_cloud_tempo.handler
	}
}

otelcol.auth.basic "grafana_cloud_tempo" {
	username = 4094
	password = env("GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_KEY")
}
```

[Grafana Tempo]: https://grafana.com/oss/tempo/
[GrafanaCloud Portal]: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/account-management/cloud-portal/#your-grafana-cloud-stack 

> ## Grafana Mimir / Prometheus Remote Write

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Grafana Mimir or Prometheus Remote Write
```

> [Prometheus Remote Write] is a popular metrics transmission protocol supported by most metrics system, including [Grafana Mimir] and GrafanaCloud. To send from OTLP to Prometheus, we do a passthrough from the [otelcol.exporter.prometheus][] to the [prometheus.remote_write][] component. The Agent’s Prometheus remote write is a more battle-tested implementation with a Write Ahead Log for resiliency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Prometheus Remote Write][] is a popular metrics transmission protocol supported by most metrics systems, including [Grafana Mimir][] and GrafanaCloud. To send from OTLP to Prometheus, we do a passthrough from the [otelcol.exporter.prometheus][] to the [prometheus.remote_write][] component. The Prometheus remote write component in Agent is a robust protocol implementation, including a Write Ahead Log for resiliency.
```

```river
otelcol.exporter.prometheus "default" {
	forward_to = [prometheus.remote_write.default.receiver]
}

prometheus.remote_write "default" {
	endpoint {
		url = "http://prometheus:9090/api/v1/write"
	}
}
```

To use Prometheus with basic-auth, which is required with GrafanaCloud Prometheus, you have to configure the [prometheus.remote_write][] component. You can get the Prometheus config from the Prometheus **Details** page in the [GrafanaCloud Portal][]:

![](../../../assets/getting-started/prometheus-config.png)

```river
otelcol.exporter.prometheus "grafana_cloud_prometheus" {
        forward_to = [prometheus.remote_write.grafana_cloud_prometheus.receiver]
    }

prometheus.remote_write "grafana_cloud_prometheus" {
    endpoint {
        url = "https://prometheus-us-central1.grafana.net/api/prom/push"

        basic_auth {
            username = 12690
            password = env("GRAFANA_CLOUD_API_KEY")
        }
    }
}
```

[Prometheus Remote Write]: https://prometheus.io/docs/operating/integrations/#remote-endpoints-and-storage
[Grafana Mimir]: https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/

## Putting it all together

> Instead of referencing `otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input` in the output of `otelcol.processor.batch`, we need to reference the three exporters we set up. The final config becomes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of referencing `otelcol.exporter.otlp.default.input` in the output of `otelcol.processor.batch`, we need to reference the three exporters we set up. The final configuration becomes:
```
